---
documentclass: article
title: Fulton 1.1
geometry: margin=1in
fontsize: 12pt
published: November 15, 2017
header-includes: \usepackage{amsmath,amsthm,amssymb,mathrsfs}\usepackage[all]{xy}
...

**1.1.\*** Let $R$ be a domain.

\(a\) If $F,G$ are forms of degree $r,s$ respectively in $R[X_1,\ldots, X_n],$
show that $FG$ is a form of degree $r+s.$

<div class="proof">
Since $F,G$ are forms $F=\sum_{i=1}^m a_i X^{(i)}$ and $G=\sum_{j=1}^l b_j
X^{(j)}$ with $a_i,b_j\in k$ and $X^{(i)},X^{(j)}$ monomials of degree $r,s$ for
each $(i),(j),$ respectively. Observe
$$
        FG=\sum_{i=1}^m\sum_{j=1}^l a_ib_jX^{(i)}X^{(j)}.
$$
Note each term is a monomial of degree $r+s.$ Thus $FG$ is a form.
</div>

\(b\) Show any factor of a form in $R[X_1,\ldots,X_n]$ is also a form.

<div class="proof">
Suppose $F$ is a form of degree $n$ and $G,H\in R[X_1,\ldots,X_n]$ such that
$GH=F.$ Then $G=G_0+G_1+\ldots+G_r$ and $H=H_0+H_1+\ldots H_s$ with $r+s=n,$
$G_i,H_j$ forms of degree $i,j$ for each $i\in\{0,\ldots,r\},$ $j\in\{0,\ldots,
s\},$ and $G_r,H_s\ne 0.$

Let $i,j$ be the least integers such that $G_i,H_j\ne 0.$ Then $G_iH_j$ is a
term of $F$ with degree $i+j.$ Since $F$ is a form it must be that $i+j=n$ and
hence $i=r, j=s.$
</div>

**1.2.\*** Let $R$ be a UFD, $K$ the quotient field of $R.$ Show that every
element $z$ of $K$ may be written $z=a/b,$ where $a,b\in R$ have no common
factors; this representative is unique up to units of $R.$

<div class="proof">
Let $z=a/b\in K.$
Since $R$ is a UFD we have $a=p_1\ldots p_n, b=q_1\ldots q_m$ with $p_1,\ldots
p_n,q_1,\ldots,q_m\in R$ irreducible. Suppose $q_i\mid p_j$ for some $i,j.$
Then $p_j=uq_i$ for some unit $u\in R.$ So
$$
        z=\frac{a}{b}=\frac{p_1\ldots p_j\ldots p_n}{q_1\ldots q_j\ldots q_m}
                =\frac{p_1\ldots uq_i \ldots p_n}{q_1\ldots q_i \ldots q_m}
                =\frac{up_1\ldots p_{j-1}p_{j+1}\ldots p_n}{q_1\ldots q_{i-1}q_{i+1}
                        \ldots q_m}.
$$
By induction we may reduce $a,b$ such that $\gcd(a,b)=1.$ That is, if $u\in R$
such that $u\mid a$ and $u\mid b,$ then $u$ is a unit.

Now suppose $z=a/b=c/d\in K$ such that $\gcd(a,b)=\gcd(c,d)=1.$ So
$ad=bc.$ Since $a\mid bc$ and $\gcd(a,b)=1,$ it must be that $a\mid c.$
Thus $c=ra$ for some $r\in R.$ Moreover, $d=rb.$ Since $\gcd(c,d)=1,$ $r$ is a
unit. Thus the representation is unique up to units of $R.$
</div>

**1.3.\*** Let $R$ be a PID. Let $P$ be a nonzero, proper, prime ideal in
$R.$

\(a\) Show that $P$ is generated by an irreducible element.

<div class="proof">
Since $R$ is a PID, $P=(a)$ for some $a\in P.$ Suppose $a=rs$ for some $r,s\in
R.$ Since $P$ is prime we may assume, without loss of generality, $r=ac,$
$c\in R.$ Thus $a=acs.$ So $cs=1$ and $s$ is a unit. Thus $a$ is irreducible.
</div>

\(b\) Show that $P$ is maximal.

<div class="proof">
Suppose $Q=(b)$ is an ideal of $R$ such that $P\subset Q.$ Then $a=br,$ $r\in
R.$ Since $a$ is irreducible by part (a), one of $b$ or $r$ must be a unit. If
$r$ is a unit then $P=(a)=(b)=Q.$ If $b$ is a unit then $bb^{-1}=1\in Q,$ so
$Q=(1)=R.$ Thus $P$ is maximal.
</div>

**1.4.\*** Let $k$ be an infinite field, $F\in k[X_1,\ldots,X_n].$ Suppose
$F(a_1,\ldots,a_n)=0$ for all $a_1,\ldots,a_n\in k.$ Show that $F=0.$

<div class="proof">
Suppose $n=1,$ that is, $F\in k[X].$ Then since $F$ has infinitely many roots,
$F=0.$

Suppose $n>1$ and the statement holds for $k[X_1,\ldots,X_{n-1}].$ Observe we
may write
$$
    F=\sum_{i=0}^{\deg(F)}F_iX_n^i
$$
where $F_i\in k[X_1,\ldots,X_{n-1}]$ for each $i.$
Let $a_1,\ldots,a_{n-1}\in k.$ If $F_i(a_1,\ldots,
a_{n-1})\ne 0$ for any $i$ then $F(a_1,\ldots,a_{n-1},X_n)$ has finitely many
roots. So $F_i(a_1,\ldots,a_{n-1})=0$ for each $i.$ Thus by the inductive
hypothesis, $F_i=0$ for each $i$ and $F=0.$
</div>

**1.5.\*** Let $k$ be any field. Show that there are an infinite number of
irreducible monic polynomials in $k[X].$

<div class="proof">
Suppose there exist only finitely many irreducible monic polynomials $F_1,
\ldots, F_n.$ Let $F_{n+1}=F_1\ldots F_n+1.$ Let $G$ be an irreducible
polynomial dividing $F_{n+1}.$ Since $G\ne F_i$ for any $i,$ we have a
contradiction.
</div>

**1.6\*** Show that any algebraically closed field is infinite.

<div class="proof">
Let $k$ be an algebraically closed field. By Problem 1.5 there are infinitely
many irreducible polynomials in $k[X].$ But since $k$ is algebraically closed
the irreducible polynomials are precisely those of the form $(X-a),$ $a\in k.$
Thus $k$ is infinite.
</div>

**1.7.\*** Let $k$ be a field, $F\in k[X_1,\ldots,X_n],$ $a_1,\ldots,a_n\in
k.$

\(a\) Show that
$$
        F=\sum\lambda_{(i)}(X_1-a_1)^{i_1}\ldots(X_n-a_n)^{i_n},
                \ \lambda_{(i)}\in k.
$$

<div class="proof">
Observe since $K[X_1]$ is a Euclidean domain we may repeatedly divide by
$(X_1-a_1)$ $a,b\in k$ and write $F=\sum_{i=0}^{\deg(F)}\lambda_i(X_1-a_1)^i,$
$\lambda_i\in k.$

Suppose $n>1$ and the statement holds for $k[X_1,\ldots,X_{n-1}].$ Then we may
write
$$
        F=\sum\mu_{(i)}(X_1-a_1)^{i_1}\ldots(X_{n-1}-a_{n-1})^{i_{n-1}}G_{(i)},
                \ \mu_{(i)}\in k, G_{(i)}\in k[X_n].
$$
Moreover, for each $(i)$ we may write $G_{(i)}=\sum_{j=0}^{\deg(G_{(i)})}\mu_j
(X_n-a_n)^j,$ each $\mu_j\in k.$ By expanding and grouping
by multidegree $(i)$ we therefore may write
$$
        F=\sum\lambda_{(i)}(X_1-a_1)^{i_1}\ldots(X_n-a_n)^{i_n},
                \ \lambda_{(i)}\in k.
$$
</div>

\(b\) If $F(a_1,\ldots,a_n)=0,$ show that $F=\sum_{i=1}^n(X_i-a_i)G_i$ for some
(not unique) $G_i$ in $k[X_1,\ldots,X_n].$

<div class="proof">
By part \(a\) we may write
$$
        F=\sum\lambda_{(i)}(X_1-a_1)^{i_1}\ldots(X_n-a_n)^{i_n},
                \ \lambda_{(i)}\in k.
$$
Since $(a_1,\ldots,a_n)$ is a root of $F$ the above sum has no
constant term, that is, for each $(i)$ we have $i_j\ge 1$ for some $j\in\{1,
\ldots,n\}.$ Hence we may regroup the sum in the form
$$
        F=\sum_{i=1}^n(X_i-a_i)G_i.
$$
</div>
