---
documentclass: article
title: Fulton 1.4
geometry: margin=1in
fontsize: 12pt
published: November 15, 2017
header-includes: \usepackage{amsmath,amsthm,amssymb,mathrsfs}\usepackage[all]{xy}
...

**1.22.\*** Let $I$ be an ideal in a ring $R,$ $\pi:R\to R/I$ the natural
homomorphism.

\(a\) Show that for every ideal $J'$ of $R/I,$ $\pi^{-1}(J')=R$ is an ideal of
$R$ containing $I,$ and for every ideal $J$ of $R$ containing $I,$ $\pi(J)=J'$
is an ideal of $R/I.$ This sets up a natural one-to-one correspondence between
ideals of $R/I$ and ideals of $R$ that contain $I.$

<div class="proof">
Suppose $J'$ is an ideal of $R/I.$ Since $\varphi$ is a ring homomorphism,
$\varphi^{-1}(J')=J$ is an abelian group. Suppose $r\in R,$ $j\in J.$ Then observe
$\varphi(rj)=\varphi(r)\varphi(j)\in J'.$ Thus $rj\in\varphi^{-1}(J')=J.$ So $J$ is an
ideal.

Suppose $J$ is an ideal of $R.$ Note $\varphi(J)=J'$ is an abelian group. Let
$j+I\in\varphi(J),$ $r+I\in R/I.$ Observe since $j\in J,$ $rj\in J.$ Thus $(j+I)+
(r+I)=rj+I=\varphi(rj)\in\varphi(J)=J'.$ Thus $J'$ is an ideal.
</div>

\(b\) Show that $J'$ is a radical ideal if and only if $J$ is radical. Similarly
for prime and maximal ideals.

<div class="proof">
Suppose $J'$ is radical. Suppose $r\in R$ such that $r^n\in J.$ Then $\varphi(r^n)=
\varphi(r)^n\in J'.$ Thus $\varphi(r)\in J'.$ Thus $r\in\varphi^{-1}(J')=J.$

Conversely, suppose $J$ is radical. Let $r+I\in R/I$ such that $r^n+I\in J'.$
Then $r^n\in\varphi^{-1}(J')=J$ and hence $r\in J.$ So $\varphi(r)=r+I\in J'.$

Suppose $J'$ is prime. Let $a,b\in R$ such that $ab\in J.$ Then $\varphi(ab)=
\varphi(a)\varphi(b)\in J'.$ So one of $\varphi(a)$ or $\varphi(b)$ must be in $J'.$ Thus
one of $a$ or $b$ must be in $J.$

Conversely, suppose $J$ is prime. Let $a+I,b+I\in R/I$ such that $ab+I\in J'.$
Then $ab\in J.$ So one of $a$ or $b$ must be in $J$ and therefore one of $a+I$
or $b+I$ must be in $J'.$

Suppose $J'$ is maximal. Suppose there exists a proper ideal $K$ of $R$ such
that $J\subsetneq K.$ Then by (a), $\varphi(K)$ is a proper ideal of $R/I$
properly containing $J',$ a contradiction. So $J$ is maximal.

Conversely, suppose $J$ is maximal. Suppose there exists a proper ideal $K'$ of
$R/I$ such that $J'\subsetneq K'.$ Then by (a), $J'\subsetneq\varphi^{-1}(K')
\subsetneq R,$ a contradiction. So $J'$ is maximal.
</div>

\(c\) Show that $J'$ is finitely generated if $J$ is. Conclude that $R/I$ is
Noetheerian if $R$ is Noetherian. Any ring of the form $k[X_1,\ldots,X_n]/I$ is
Noetherian.

<div class="proof">
Suppose $J$ is finitely generated by $\{j_1,\ldots,j_n\}\subset J.$ Then
for any $j\in J$ we have $j=r_1j_1+\ldots+r_nj_n,$ $r_1,\ldots,r_n\in R.$
Thus for any $j+I\in J'$ we have
$$
        j+I=(r_1j_1+\ldots+r_nj_n)+I = (r_1+I)(j_1+I)+\ldots+(r_n+I)(j_n+I).
$$
That is, $J'$ is generated by $\{j_1+I,\ldots,j_n+I\}.$

Therefore if $R$ is Noetherian, so is $R/I.$ Since $k[X_1,\ldots,X_n]$
is Noetherian, $k[X_1,\ldots,X_n]/I$ is Noetherian for any ideal $I.$
</div>
